
# Preface


Why yet another book on Artificial Intelligence? 

It is true that hundreds of publications on Artificial Intelligence (AI) have been published within the last decades - scientific papers and text books. Most of them focus on the theory behind AI solutions: logic, reasoning, statistical foundations, etc. However, little can be found on engineering AI applications.

Modern, complex IT applications are not built from scratch but by integrating off-the-shelf components: libraries, frameworks, and services. The same applies, of course, for AI applications. Over the last decades, numerous  off-the-shelf components for AI base functionality such as logic, reasoning, and statistics have been implemented - commercial and open source. Integrating such components into user friendly, high-performance, and maintainable AI applications requires specific engineering skills. This book focuses on those skills.

My own professional background is that of a software engineer. After under-/postgraduate studies of Computer Science in Germany and a Ph.D. program in Australia, I worked for more than a decade in a large German software company.  In extensive teams, we developed custom software for clients: multinational banks, credit-card issuers, tour operators, telecommunication providers, fashion companies and ATC authorities. My tasks were as diverse as the industry sectors and technologies used. They ranged from development, software architecture, project management to managing a division and running the company's research department.

After re-entering university as a professor 14 years ago, a common theme of my courses has been the professional development of software according to engineering principles and practices. AI was an old love of mine but my industry projects hat little relation to AI. Noticing that AI applications - powerful image processing, speech analysis and generation etc. - were rapidly entering the market attracted my interest, again. Via R&D projects, funded by industry and the public, I gradually built up expertise in engineering AI applications. In teams with colleagues, postgraduate students and industry partners we developed applications for a hotel portal, a library,  an art museum,  the cancer department of a hospital, the borderline unit of a psycho-therapeutic clinic, and a robot manufacturer. However diverse the industry sectors, many approaches and technologies can be used across the projects in order to build maintainable AI applications with a good user experience that meet functional and non-functional requirements, particularly high performance requirements. Overall, we are combining general software engineering skills with AI expertise. 

When I perceived a growing demand for AI applications in the business and consumer markets in 2014, I started a new M.Sc. course "Applied Artificial Intelligence" at Darmstadt University of Applied Sciences. This book reflects topics of this course. I am constantly learning: from project experience, from my colleagues and partners, from my students, and hopefully also from you, the readers of this book. So please, don't hesitate to contact me under bernhard.humm@h-da.de when you agree or disagree with my findings. 


X> To support you to come to grips with the topics I have added questions and exercises in all chapters. They are indicated by a pencil symbol.


Finally, I would like to thank my friend and project partner Prof Dr Paul Walsh from NSilico Lifescience Ltd., Ireland, for valuable comments and hints.



Bernhard Humm, Darmstadt, Germany, 2016 and 2019

